CHAPTER VII THROUGH XII.
And the Lord said unto Noah, Come thou and all thy house into the ark, for thee have
I seen righteous before me in this generation.
Of every clean beast thou shalt take to thee by sevens, the male and his female, and of
of fowls also of the air by sevens, the male and the female, to keep seed alive upon the
face of all the earth.
For yet seven days, and I will cause it to rain upon the earth forty days and forty nights,
and every living substance that I have made will I destroy from off the face of the earth.
And Noah did according unto all that the Lord commanded him.
And Noah was six hundred years old when the flood of waters was upon the earth.
And Noah went in, and his sons, and his wife, and his sons' wives with him, into the ark,
because of the waters of the flood.
Of clean beasts, and of beasts that are not clean, and of fowls, and of every thing that
creepeth upon the earth, there went in two and two unto Noah into the ark, the male and
the female, as God had commanded Noah.
And it came to pass after seven days that the waters of the flood were upon the earth.
In the six hundredth year of Noah's life, in the second month, the seventeenth day of
the month, the same day were all the fountains of the great deep broken up, and the windows
of heaven were opened.
And the rain was upon the earth forty days and forty nights.
In the selfsame day entered Noah, and Shem, and Ham, and Japeth, the sons of Noah, and
Noah's wife, and the three wives of his sons with them, into the ark, they and every beast
after his kind, and all the cattle after their kind, and every creeping thing that creepeth
upon the earth after his kind, and every fowl after his kind, every bird of every sort.
And they went in unto Noah into the ark two and two of all flesh wherein is the breath
of life.
And they that went in, went in male and female of all flesh, as God had commanded him, and
the Lord shut him in.
And the flood was forty days upon the earth, and the waters increased and bare up the ark,
and it was lift up above the earth.
And the waters prevailed and were increased greatly upon the earth, and the ark went upon
the face of the waters.
And the waters prevailed exceedingly upon the earth, and all the high hills that were
under the whole heaven were covered.
Fifteen cubits upward did the waters prevail, and the mountains were covered.
And all flesh died that moved upon the earth, both of fowl and of cattle and of beast and
of every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth and every man, all in whose nostrils
was the breath of life, of all that was in the dry land, died.
And every living substance was destroyed which was upon the face of the ground, both man
and cattle and the creeping things and the fowl of the heaven, and they were destroyed
from the earth, and Noah only remained alive and they that were with him in the ark.
And the waters prevailed upon the earth and hundred and fifty days.
CHAPTER VIII
And God remembered Noah and every living thing and all the cattle that was with him in the
ark, and God made a wind to pass over the earth and the waters assuaged.
The fountains also of the deep and the windows of heaven were stopped and the rain from heaven
was restrained, and the waters returned from off the earth continually, and after the end
of the hundred and fifty days the waters were abated.
And the ark rested in the seventh month on the seventeenth day of the month upon the
mountains of Ararat.
And the waters decreased continually until the tenth month, in the tenth month on the
first day of the month were the tops of the mountains seen.
And it came to pass at the end of forty days that Noah opened the window of the ark which
he had made, and he sent forth a raven which went forth to and fro until the waters were
dried up from off the earth.
Also he sent forth a dove from him to see if the waters were abated from off the face
of the ground.
But the dove found no rest for the sole of her foot, and she returned under him into
the ark, for the waters were on the face of the whole earth.
Then he put forth his hand and took her and pulled her in unto him into the ark.
And he stayed yet other seven days, and again he sent forth the dove out of the ark, and
the dove came into him in the evening, and lo, in her mouth was an olive-leaf plucked
off, so Noah knew that the waters were abated from off the earth.
And he stayed yet other seven days, and sent forth the dove, which returned not again unto
him any more.
And it came to pass in the six hundredth and first year, in the first month, the first
day of the month, the waters were dried up from off the earth, and Noah removed the covering
of the ark, and looked, and behold, the face of the ground was dry.
And in the second month, on the seventh and twentieth day of the month, was the earth
dried.
And God spake unto Noah, saying, Go forth of the ark thou and thy wife and thy sons
and thy sons' wives with thee.
Bring forth with thee every living thing that is with thee of all flesh, both of fowl and
of cattle, and of every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth, that they may breed
abundantly in the earth and be fruitful and multiply upon the earth.
And Noah went forth and his sons and his wife and his sons' wives with him.
Every beast, every creeping thing, and every fowl, and whatsoever creepeth upon the earth
after their kinds, went forth out of the ark.
And Noah builded an altar unto the Lord, and took of every clean beast and of every clean
fowl, and offered burnt offerings on the altar.
And the Lord smelled a sweet savor, and the Lord said in his heart, I will not again curse
the ground any more for man's sake, for the imagination of man's heart is evil from his
youth, neither will I again smite any more every thing living as I have done.
While the earth remaineth seed-time and harvest and cold and heat and summer and winter and
day and night shall not cease.
CHAPTER IX
And God blessed Noah and his sons and said unto them, Be fruitful and multiply and replenish
the earth, and the fear of you and the dread of you shall be upon every beast of the earth,
and upon every fowl of the air, upon all that moveth upon the earth, and upon all the fishes
of the sea, into your hand are they delivered.
Every moving thing that liveth shall be meat for you, even as the green herb have I given
you all things.
But flesh with the life thereof, which is the blood thereof, shall ye not eat.
And surely your blood of your lives will I require, at the hand of every beast will I
require it, and at the hand of man, at the hand of every man's brother will I require
the life of man.
Whoso shedeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed, for in the image of God made
he man.
And you, be ye fruitful and multiply, bring forth abundantly in the earth, and multiply
therein.
And God spake unto Noah and to his sons with him, saying, And I, behold, I establish my
covenant with you, and with your seed after you, and with every living creature that is
with you, of the fowl, of the cattle, and of every beast of the earth with you, from
all that go out of the ark to every beast of the earth.
And I will establish my covenant with you, neither shall all flesh be cut off any more
by the waters of a flood, neither shall there be any more of flood to destroy the earth.
And God said, This is the token of the covenant which I make between me and you, and every
living creature that is with you, for perpetual generations.
I do set my bow in the cloud, and it shall be for a token of a covenant between me and
the earth.
And it shall come to pass, when I bring a cloud over the earth, that the bow shall be
cloud, and I will remember my covenant which is between me and you and every living creature
of all flesh, and the waters shall no more become a flood to destroy all flesh.
And the bow shall be in the cloud, and I will look upon it, that I may remember the everlasting
covenant between God and every living creature of all flesh that is upon the earth.
And God said unto Noah, This is the token of the covenant which I have established between
me and all flesh that is upon the earth.
And the sons of Noah that went forth of the ark were Shem and Ham and Japheth, and Ham
is the father of Canaan.
These were the three sons of Noah, and of them was the whole earth overspread.
And Noah began to be an husbandman, and he planted a vineyard, and he drank of the wine,
and was drunken, and he was uncovered within his tent.
And Ham, the father of Canaan, saw the nakedness of his father, and told his two brethren without.
And Shem and Japheth took a garment, and laid it upon both their shoulders, and went backward,
and covered the nakedness of their father, and their faces were backward, and they saw
not their father's nakedness.
And Noah awoke from his wine, and knew what his younger son had done unto him.
And he said, Cursed be Canaan, a servant of servants shall he be unto his brethren.
And he said, Blessed be the Lord God of Shem, and Canaan shall be his servant.
God shall enlarge Japheth, and he shall dwell in the tents of Shem, and Canaan shall be
his servant.
And Noah lived after the flood three hundred and fifty years.
And all the days of Noah were nine hundred and fifty years, and he died.
Now these are the generations of the sons of Noah, Shem, Ham, and Japheth, and unto
them were sons born after the flood.
The sons of Japheth, Gomer, and Magog, and Medai, and Javan, and Tubal, and Meshach,
and Tyrus.
And the sons of Gomer, Ashkenaz, and Riphoth, and Togarmah.
And the sons of Javan, Elisha, and Tarshish, Kitim, and Dodenim.
By these were the Isles of the Gentiles divided in their lands, every one after his tongue,
after their families, in their nations.
And the sons of Ham, Cush, and Misraim, and Foot, and Canaan.
And the sons of Cush, Seba, and Havilah, and Sabta, and Rehema, and Sabtika.
And the sons of Rehema, Sheba, and Dedan.
And Cush begat Nimrod, he began to be a mighty one in the earth. He was a mighty hunter before
the Lord, wherefore it is said, even as Nimrod the mighty hunter before the Lord. And the
beginning of his kingdom was Babel, and Urek, and Akkad, and Calni, in the land of Shinar.
Out of that land went forth Asher, and builded Nineveh, and the city Rehoboth, and Cala,
and Rezin, between Nineveh and Cala, the same as a great city.
And Misraim begat Ludim, and Adimim, and Lahabim, and Naphtihim, and Pathrasim, and Chazlehim,
out of whom came Philistim, and Kaftorim.
And Canaan begat Sidon his first born, and Heth, and the Jebusite, and the Amorite, and
the Gergosite, and the Hivite, and the Arkite, and the Sinite, and the Arvidite, and the
Zemurite, and the Haemothite. And afterward were the families of the Canaanites spread
abroad.
And the border of the Canaanites was from Sidon as thou comest to Girar, unto Gaza,
as thou goest unto Sodom, and Gomorrah, and Adma, and Zeboam, even unto Lesha. These
are the sons of Ham after their families, after their tongues, in their countries,
and in their nations.
Unto Shem also the father of all the children of Eber, the brother of Japheth the elder,
even to him were children born. The children of Shem, Elam and Asher, and Arphaxad, and
Lod, and Aram. And the children of Aram, Uz, and Hul, and Gether, and Mash. And Arphaxad
begat Sala, and Sala begat Eber. And unto Eber were born two sons, the name of one was
Peleg, for in his days was the earth divided, and his brother's name was Joktan.
And Joktan begat El-Modad, and Shelef, and Hazar-Meveth, and Jira, and Hadorim, and Uzzal,
and Dikla, and Obel, and Abimeel, and Sheba, and Ophir, and Havilah, and Jobab. All these
were the sons of Joktan. And their dwelling was from Misha as thou goest unto Seafar,
a mount of the east. These are the sons of Shem after their families, after their tongues,
in their lands, after their nations. These are the families of the sons of Noah, after
their generations, in their nations, and by these were the nations divided in the earth
after the flood.
CHAPTER XI
And the whole earth was of one language and of one speech. And it came to pass, as they
journeyed from the east, that they found a plain in the land of Shinar, and they dwelt
there. And they said one to another, Go to, let us make brick, and burn them throughly.
And they had brick for stone, and slime had they for mortar. And they said, Go to, let
us build us a city and a tower, whose top may reach unto heaven, and let us make us
a name, lest we be scattered abroad upon the face of the whole earth.
And the Lord came down to see the city and the tower which the children of men builded.
And the Lord said, Behold, the people is one, and they have all one language, and this they
begin to do, and now nothing will be restrained from them which they have imagined to do.
Go to, let us go down, and there confound their language, that they may not understand
one another's speech. So the Lord scattered them abroad from thence upon the face of all
the earth, and they left off to build the city. Therefore is the name of it called Babel,
because the Lord did there confound the language of all the earth, and from thence did the
Lord scatter them abroad upon the face of all the earth.
These are the generations of Shem. Shem was an hundred years old, and begat Arphaxid two
years after the flood. And Shem lived after he begat Arphaxid five hundred years, and
begat sons and daughters. And Arphaxid lived five and thirty years, and begat Sala. And
Arphaxid lived after he begat Sala four hundred and three years, and begat sons and daughters.
And Sala lived thirty years, and begat Ybar. And Sala lived after he begat Ybar four hundred
and three years, and begat sons and daughters. And Ybar lived four and thirty years, and
begat Peleg. And Eber lived after he begat Peleg four hundred and
thirty years, and begat sons and daughters. And Peleg lived thirty
years, and begat Riou. And Peleg lived after he begat Riou two hundred
and nine years, and begat sons and daughters. And Riou lived two and
thirty years, and begat Siirog. And Riou lived after he begat Siirog
two hundred and seven years, and begat sons and daughters.
And Si-ragh lived thirty years, and begat Nahor.
And Si-ragh lived after he begat Nahor, two hundred years, and begat sons
and daughters.
And Nahor lived nine and twenty years, and begat Terah.
And Nahor lived after he begat Terah, and a hundred and nineteen years,
and begat sons and daughters.
And Tyra lived seventy years, and begat Abram, Nahor, and Haran.
Now these are the generations of Tyra. Tyra begat Abram, Nahor, and Haran, and Haran begat
Lot. And Haran died before his father Tyra in the land of his nativity in Ur of the Chaldees.
And Abram and Nahor took them wives. The name of Abram's wife was Sarai, and the name of
Nahor's wife, Milka, the daughter of Haran, the father of Milka, and the father of Iska.
But Sarai was barren, she had no child. And Tyra took Abram his son, and Lot the son of
Haran his son's son, and Sarai his daughter-in-law, his son Abram's wife, and they went forth
with them from Ur of the Chaldees to go into the land of Canaan, and they came unto Haran
and dwelt there. And the days of Tyra were two hundred and five years, and Tyra died
in Haran.
Chapter 12
Now the LORD had said unto Abram, Get thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred,
and from thy father's house, unto a land that I will show thee. And I will make of thee
a great nation, and I will bless thee, and make thy name great, and thou shalt be a blessing.
And I will bless them that bless thee, and curse him that curseth thee, and in thee shall
all families of the earth be blessed.
So Abram departed as the LORD had spoken unto him, and Lot went with him, and Abram was
seventy and five years old when he departed out of Haran. And Abram took Sarai his wife,
and Lot his brother's son, and all their substance that they had gathered, and the souls that
they had gotten in Haran, and they went forth to go into the land of Canaan, and into the
land of Canaan they came.
And Abram passed through the land unto the place of Sycam, unto the plain of Moray, and
the Canaanite was then in the land. And the LORD appeared unto Abram, and said, Unto thy
seed will I give this land, and their ability an altar unto the LORD who appeared unto him.
And he removed from thence unto a mountain on the east of Bethel, and pitched his tent,
having Bethel on the west, and Haei on the east, and there he builded an altar unto the
LORD, and called upon the name of the LORD. And Abram journeyed, going on still toward
the south.
And there was a famine in the land, and Abram went down into Egypt to sojourn there, for
the famine was grievous in the land. And it came to pass, when he was come near to
enter into Egypt, that he said unto Sarai his wife, Behold now, I know that thou art
a fair woman to look upon. Therefore it shall come to pass, when the Egyptians shall see
thee, that they shall say, This is his wife, and they will kill me, but they will save
thee alive.
Say, I pray thee, thou art my sister, that it may be well with me for thy sake, and my
soul shall live because of thee.
And it came to pass, that, when Abram was come into Egypt, the Egyptians beheld the
woman, that she was very fair. The princes also of Pharaoh saw her, and commended her
before Pharaoh, and the woman was taken into Pharaoh's house. And he entreated Abram well
for her sake, and he had sheep, and oxen, and he-asses, and men-servants, and maid-servants,
and she-asses, and camels. And the LORD plagued Pharaoh and his house with great plagues because
of Sarai, Abram's wife. And Pharaoh called Abram, and said, What is this that thou hast
done unto me? Why didst thou not tell me that she was thy wife? Why saidst thou, She is
my sister? So I might have taken her to me to wife. Now therefore, behold thy wife, take
her, and go thy way. And Pharaoh commanded his men concerning him, and they sent him
away, and his wife, and all that he had.
CHAPTER VII.